Add alternate solution for "Friendly Spiders" (#5969)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/silver/cf-1775D.mdx

id: cf-1775D
source: CF
title: Friendly Spiders

> author: Kevin Sheng, johnzhou721

Reviewer: I am under the assumption if you were comfortable putting your full name as your username you would be comfortable putting it in the author section for crediting. If it makes you feel better, John Zhou is, in my opinion, more generic than johnzhou721, as you are putting a top 10 most common first name with a top 10 most common chinese last name as opposed to a literal tag. Do you have a specific reason as to maintain anonymity?

> author: Kevin Sheng, johnzhou721

Author: Sure, got my logic backwards a bit.  I was under the impression that more anon === better for middle schoolers.

> author: Kevin Sheng, johnzhou721

Reviewer: No worries. I am pretty confident no one is bothering to google the contributors... Feel free to strike your name if you truly feel bothered

---

[Official Analysis (C++)](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/111286)

## Solution 1

### Explanation

First, notice that when you have spiders that are friends, the $\gcd$
requirement implies that they must share a common prime factor.  This implies
that all spiders with a common factor can directly pass messages to one another.

Note that "directly" passing messages from one another for *any* spiders that
share the common factor is expensive to maintain; $3\times10^5$ is already
enough spiders such that having many more orders of magnitudes of edges to
represent all possible communications naively simply isn't going to cut it.

> However, what we *can* do is set up intermediate nodes that, to represent a

Reviewer: please break this up into multiple explicit sentences

present in the data, and connect spiders to intermediate nodes if and only if
the spider is divisible by the prime factor represented by that intermediate
node.

It is easy to see that the length of the path in the sense of the original
problem is the length of the shortest path over our new reformulated graph,
divided by 2.  We add 1 to that, since we need to count the starting node,
according to the problem's specifications.

The total number of nodes is $\leq3\times10^5+\pi(3\times10^5)=3\times 10^5+25991\approx3.2\times10^5$, and, since in the worst case in terms of the number
of prime factors in a number,
$2\times3\times5\times7\times\dots\times17>3\times10^5$
(multiplying the 7 smallest primes), we at most have $7$ prime factors for a
number, the number of edges does not exceed $3\times10^5\times7=2.1\times10^6$.
This means that BFS for finding the shortest path, with a time complexity of
$\mathcal O(n+m)\approx 6\sim 7\text{ orders of magnitude}$, is sufficient.

### Implementation

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <algorithm>
#include <iostream>
#include <map>
#include <queue>
#include <utility>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

> int n;

Reviewer: ```suggestion

int n;
```

vector<int> g[400005];
bool vis[400005];
int primes[400005];
int spf[400005];
int parent[400005];

int total;
void addprime(int p, int i) {
	if (!primes[p]) primes[p] = ++total;
	// cout << p << ' ' << primes[p] << endl;
	g[primes[p]].push_back(i);
	g[i].push_back(primes[p]);
}

void sieve() {
	for (int i = 2; i <= 400000; i++) spf[i] = i;
	for (int i = 2; i * i <= 400000; i++) {
		if (spf[i] == i) {
			for (int j = i * i; j <= 400000; j += i) {
				if (spf[j] == j) spf[j] = i;
			}
		}
	}
}

void factorize(int a, int i) {
	while (a > 1) {
		int p = spf[a];
		if (a > 1 && a % p == 0) addprime(p, i);
		while (a > 1 && a % p == 0) a /= p;
	}
}

int main() {
	sieve();
	cin >> n;
	total = n;
	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
		int a;
		cin >> a;
		factorize(a, i);
	}
	int start, end;
	cin >> start >> end;
	queue<pair<int, int>> q;
	vis[start] = true;
	q.push(make_pair(start, 0));
	while (!q.empty()) {
		auto front = q.front();
		q.pop();
		int loc = front.first, len = front.second;

> 		// cout << loc << endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

</JavaSection>
</LanguageSection>

# Solution 2

## Explanation

First, notice that two spiders are friends, they must share a common prime factor.
But due to the constraints of this question, we can't maintain all the possible edges
between any two spiders.

Since the complete graphs for the spiders are grouped by prime factors, we want to

> represent the prime factors somehow.  One good way to do this is to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
represent the prime factors somehow. One good way to do this is to
```

> create an intermediate node for each prime factor present in the data.  Then,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
create an intermediate node for each prime factor present in the data. Then,
```

from each of those prime factors nodes, we connect to the spiders divisible
by that prime factor.  A communication from a spider to another with a common
prime factor will thus be formulated as the spider passing its message to the
prime factor "station", and then the station passing the message to another
spider with the same prime factor.

We can now notice that the length of the path in the original
problem is the length of the shortest path over our newly reformulated graph,
divided by 2 plus 1, accounting for the starting node.
according to the problem's specifications.

The time complexity for a BFS is $\mathcal O(V+E)$; in this case, the number of

> vertices is $n+\pi(n)$, and since $\pi(n)<n$, this is $\mathcal O(n)$.  For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vertices is $n+\pi(n)$, and since $\pi(n)<n$, this is $\mathcal O(n)$. For
```

the number of edges, there's only a modest amount of prime factors can at most
have before we reach $3\times10^5$ ($2\times3\times5\times\cdots\times17$ with

> $7$ primes already works).  By some number theory, the total amount of edges is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$7$ primes already works). By some number theory, the total amount of edges is
```

</JavaSection>
</LanguageSection>

## Solution 2

### Explanation

First, notice that when you have spiders that are friends, the $\gcd$

> requirement implies that they must share a common prime factor.  This implies

Reviewer 2: This is kinda redundant no? You could shorten it to

First, notice that two spiders are friends, they must share a common prime factor.

Author: Done!

that all spiders with a common factor can directly pass messages to one another.

> Note that "directly" passing messages from one another for *any* spiders that

Reviewer 2: This line is kinda unclear, I think you meant to say that maintaining like what spiders can send messages for all spiders is really expensive?

share the common factor is expensive to maintain; $3\times10^5$ is already
enough spiders such that having many more orders of magnitudes of edges to

> represent all possible communications naively simply isn't going to cut it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
represent all possible communications is not possible.
```

> Since the complete graphs for the spiders are grouped by prime factors, we think

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add a sentence about the construction of the graphs like how solution 1 had done so.

Author: Do you mean an example for the construction?  What speicfic aspect of the construction?

of representing the prime factor in some way.  One good way to do this is to
create an intermediate node for each prime factor present in the data.  Then,
from each of those prime factors nodes, we connect to the spiders divisible
by that prime factor.  A communication from a spider to another with a common
prime factor will thus be formulated as the spider passing its message to the
prime factor "station", and then the station passing the message to another
spider with the same prime factor.

It is easy to see that the length of the path in the sense of the original

> problem is the length of the shortest path over our new reformulated graph,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
problem is the length of the shortest path over our newly reformulated graph,
```

> divided by 2.  We add 1 to that, since we need to count the starting node,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
divided by 2 plus 1, accounting for the starting node.
```

according to the problem's specifications.

The time complexity for a BFS is $\mathcal O(V+E)$; in this case, the number of
vertices is $n+\pi(n)$, and since $\pi(n)<n$, this is $\mathcal O(n)$.  For

> the number of edges, there's only a modest amount of prime factors can at most

Author: Not "under 3e5"... I think "that can be multiplied to reach latex[3e5]"?

have before we reach $3\times10^5$ ($2\times3\times5\times\cdots\times17$ with

> $7$ primes already works).  By some number theory, the total amount of edges is

Author: The number theory part is complicated... let's just say the total amount of edges is around.  I've gotten a suggestion from @pleth9 saying that we need a final simplified time complexity in the Implementation section — can I just put the final equation there without explaining / just do a link to wikipedia?

> $7$ primes already works).  By some number theory, the total amount of edges is

Reviewer 2: Well this was for the total number of edges, but yeah I would just simply it into one time complexity and put that there.

A link to a wikipedia is ok? (I'm not 100% sure) but as long as it is relevant.

$\mathcal O(n\frac{\log n}{\log\log n})$.

So the time complexity for the BFS is $\mathcal O(n\frac{\log n}{\log\log n})$
overall.

### Implementation

This implementation uses a sieve for a little bit of speedup, which is not strictly
required for this problem.

For factorizing all the numbers, the sieve implemented below is
$\mathcal O(n\log\log A)$ with $A=3\times10^5$ being the upper bound for the
numbers; the factorization step is then on average $\mathcal O(\log\log A)$.
The average time complexity is then
$\mathcal O(n\frac{\log n}{\log\log n}+n\log\log A)$.

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <algorithm>
#include <iostream>
#include <map>
#include <queue>
#include <utility>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;
vector<int> g[400005];
bool vis[400005];
int primes[400005];
int spf[400005];

> int parent[400005];

Reviewer 3: 1. is the +5 necessary?
2. lotta magic numbers, here, maybe put it in a `MAX_N` variable or smth

Author: +5 was some fuzzy bounds because I 1-index and also if accidentally accessing n+1 it's fine.  That said for some things it was only supposed to be 3e5 like spf... also primes can be a much lower bound.

int total;

> void addprime(int p, int i) {

Reviewer 3: doc comment for what this does

	if (!primes[p]) primes[p] = ++total;
	g[primes[p]].push_back(i);
	g[i].push_back(primes[p]);
}

void sieve() {

> 	for (int i = 2; i <= 400000; i++) spf[i] = i;

Reviewer 3: same thing here

	for (int i = 2; i * i <= 400000; i++) {
		if (spf[i] == i) {
			for (int j = i * i; j <= 400000; j += i) {
				if (spf[j] == j) spf[j] = i;
			}
		}
	}
}

void factorize(int a, int i) {
	while (a > 1) {
		int p = spf[a];
		if (a > 1 && a % p == 0) addprime(p, i);
		while (a > 1 && a % p == 0) a /= p;
	}
}

int main() {
	sieve();
	int n;
	cin >> n;
	total = n;
	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
		int a;
		cin >> a;
		factorize(a, i);
	}
	int start, end;
	cin >> start >> end;
	queue<pair<int, int>> q;
	vis[start] = true;
	q.push(make_pair(start, 0));

> 	while (!q.empty()) {

Reviewer 3: space out the code into kinda sorta independent segments

		auto front = q.front();
		q.pop();
		int loc = front.first, len = front.second;
		if (loc == end) {
			cout << len / 2 + 1 << endl;
			vector<int> points(1, loc);
			int current = loc;
			while (current != start) {
				current = parent[current];
				points.push_back(current);
			}
			reverse(points.begin(), points.end());
			int cnt = 0;
			for (auto a : points) {
				if (++cnt % 2) cout << a << ' ';
			}
			cout << endl;
			return 0;
		}
		for (int next : g[loc]) {
			if (!vis[next]) {
				vis[next] = true;
				parent[next] = loc;
				q.push(make_pair(next, len + 1));
			}
		}
	}
	cout << -1 << endl;

> 	return 0;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: Why?  I was under the impression that this is nonstandard CPP.

</JavaSection>
</LanguageSection>

# Solution 2

## Explanation

Maintain all the possible edges between any two spiders is too inefficient.

Since the complete graphs for the spiders are grouped by prime factors, we
build a graph that groups spiders by prime factors. We do this
by creating nodes representing prime factors, and connecting them
to the spiders divisible by that prime factor.

We can now notice that the length of the path in the original
problem is the length of the shortest path over our newly reformulated graph,
divided by 2 plus 1, accounting for the starting node.

The number of vertices is the amount of prime factors plus the amount of nodes,
which is at most double $N$.
As for the number of edges, notice that any integer $n$ can have at most $\log n$ prime factors,

> so our number of edges is bounded by $O(N \log N)$.

Reviewer 4: maybe briefly mention why

Author: Done!

</JavaSection>
</LanguageSection>

# Solution 2

## Explanation

Maintaining all the possible edges between any two spiders is too inefficient.

Since the complete graphs for the spiders are grouped by prime factors, we
build a graph that groups spiders by prime factors. We do this
by creating nodes representing prime factors, and connecting them
to the spiders divisible by that prime factor.

We can now notice that the length of the path in the original
problem is the length of the shortest path over our newly reformulated graph,
divided by 2 plus 1, accounting for the starting node.

The number of vertices is the amount of prime factors plus the amount of nodes,
which is at most double $N$.
As for the number of edges, notice that any integer $n$ can have at most $\log N$ prime factors,
so our number of edges is bounded by $O(N \log N)$ (since the smallest prime number is $2$ and
most primes are larger than that, there's at most $\log N$ primes that needs to be multiplied
before reaching $N$).

With these parameters for our altered graph, BFS now becomes feasible.

## Implementation

> **Exact Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O\left(N\frac{\log N}{\log\log N}+\frac A{\log A}+N\log\log A\right)$

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O\left(N\frac{\log N}{\log\log N}+\frac A{\log A}+N\log\log A\right)$
```

the paragraph below is still kind of vague/useless, imo cut it or put a spoiler for a more detailed explanation
